About ICON — ICON Website
Search Site
Search
Advanced Search…
Search Site
Search
Advanced Search…
Site Map
Contact
Newsletter
Docs
Log in
Sprache:
About us
ICON Partners
ICON Projects
ICON Governance
Collaborating Communities
ICON Model
Release Download
Documentation
Getting Started With ICON
Community Interface
Supported Configurations
Publications
Reports on ICON
Reference Publications
Events
News
News
Community Newsletter
A new chapter was opened when ICON was released as open source code in January 2024. We are happy to be able to celebrate this and are grateful for the enormous amount of work that many colleagues have put in.
ICON Open Source Release
Home
About ICON
https://www.icon-model.org
https://www.icon-model.org/@@site-logo/ICON_logo_black_small.png
About ICON
What is ICON
ICON is a flexible, scalable, high-performance modelling framework for weather, climate and environmental prediction that provides actionable information for society and advances our understanding of the Earth's climate system.
ICON is evolving into an internationally recognized and widely used modeling framework for weather, climate, and environmental prediction that allows the users to solve challenging problems of high societal relevance. It will push the boundaries of what is computationally feasible to advance knowledge and understanding and support innovation in weather, climate and environmental services.
ICON partnership
The ICON partnership represents a close and diverse collaboration between its members and development partners, bringing together research and operations in weather and climate and expertise in high performance computing and data in a synergistic way.
Open source release
ICON is available to the community under a permissive open source licence (BSD-3C). The ICON partners provide various tutorials, training courses and materials online. The framework is being tested on a range of supercomputer architectures, including CPU, vector machine and GPU-based systems.
The ICON partners are working towards a long-term goal of open development, where tools and communication structures are expected to evolve over time. This website provides an entry point, with basic links to download and use the model, and where further material is available.
Release Download
About us
Publications
News
New Report: Redler et al. (2026) - ICON input via Python
We are happy to announce the publication of a new Report on ICON, Issue 12, on ICON input via Python by R. Redler et al. (2026). ...
ICON Release 2026.04 now available
ICON release 2026.04 has been published on April 30, 2026. A major change for this release is that the model namelist documentation is now available. ...
ICON simulation wins Gordon Bell Prize for Climate Modelling 2025
ICON team receives international recognition for groundbreaking achievements in high-performance computing. ...
ICON Release 2025.10 and patch release 2025.10-1 available
A new ICON release is now available. ...
ICCARUS 2026
The registration for the ICON/COSMO/CLM/ART User Seminar (ICCARUS) 2026 is now open. ...
Show all
Upcoming Events
ICON All-Hands Meeting 2026
Show all
Sitemap
Contact
Privacy Policy
Imprint
Accessibility
Copyright